clang-tools-extra/docs/clang-tidy/checks/cppcoreguidelines/special-member-functions.rst, before:

.. title:: clang-tidy - cppcoreguidelines-special-member-functions

cppcoreguidelines-special-member-functions
==========================================

The check finds classes where some but not all of the special member functions
are defined.

By default the compiler defines a copy constructor, copy assignment operator,
move constructor, move assignment operator and destructor. The default can be
suppressed by explicit user-definitions. The relationship between which
functions will be suppressed by definitions of other functions is complicated
and it is advised that all five are defaulted or explicitly defined.

Note that defining a function with ``= delete`` is considered to be a
definition.

This check implements `C.21
<https://isocpp.github.io/CppCoreGuidelines/CppCoreGuidelines#Rc-five>`_
from the C++ Core Guidelines.

Options
-------

.. option:: AllowSoleDefaultDtor

   When set to `true` (default is `false`), this check will only trigger on
   destructors if they are defined and not defaulted.

   .. code-block:: c++

     struct A { // This is fine.
       virtual ~A() = default;
     };

     struct B { // This is not fine.
       ~B() {}
     };

     struct C {
       // This is not checked, because the destructor might be defaulted in
       // another translation unit.
       ~C();
     };

.. option:: AllowMissingMoveFunctions

   When set to `true` (default is `false`), this check doesn't flag classes which define no move
   operations at all. It still flags classes which define only one of either
   move constructor or move assignment operator. With this option enabled, the following class won't be flagged:

   .. code-block:: c++

     struct A {
       A(const A&);
       A& operator=(const A&);
       ~A();
     };

.. option:: AllowMissingMoveFunctionsWhenCopyIsDeleted

   When set to `true` (default is `false`), this check doesn't flag classes which define deleted copy
   operations but don't define move operations. This flag is related to Google C++ Style Guide
   https://google.github.io/styleguide/cppguide.html#Copyable_Movable_Types. With this option enabled, the
   following class won't be flagged:

   .. code-block:: c++

     struct A {
       A(const A&) = delete;
       A& operator=(const A&) = delete;
       ~A();
     };

Commit message:

[clang-tidy] Add AllowImplicitlyDeletedCopyOrMove option to cppcoreguidelines-special-member-functions (#71683)
Improved cppcoreguidelines-special-member-functions check with a new
option AllowImplicitlyDeletedCopyOrMove, which removes the requirement
for explicit copy or move special member functions when they are already
implicitly deleted.

Closes #62392

clang-tools-extra/docs/clang-tidy/checks/cppcoreguidelines/special-member-functions.rst, after:

.. title:: clang-tidy - cppcoreguidelines-special-member-functions

cppcoreguidelines-special-member-functions
==========================================

The check finds classes where some but not all of the special member functions
are defined.

By default the compiler defines a copy constructor, copy assignment operator,
move constructor, move assignment operator and destructor. The default can be
suppressed by explicit user-definitions. The relationship between which
functions will be suppressed by definitions of other functions is complicated
and it is advised that all five are defaulted or explicitly defined.

Note that defining a function with ``= delete`` is considered to be a
definition.

This check implements `C.21
<https://isocpp.github.io/CppCoreGuidelines/CppCoreGuidelines#Rc-five>`_
from the C++ Core Guidelines.

Options
-------

.. option:: AllowSoleDefaultDtor

   When set to `true` (default is `false`), this check will only trigger on
   destructors if they are defined and not defaulted.

   .. code-block:: c++

     struct A { // This is fine.
       virtual ~A() = default;
     };

     struct B { // This is not fine.
       ~B() {}
     };

     struct C {
       // This is not checked, because the destructor might be defaulted in
       // another translation unit.
       ~C();
     };

.. option:: AllowMissingMoveFunctions

   When set to `true` (default is `false`), this check doesn't flag classes
   which define no move operations at all. It still flags classes which define
   only one of either move constructor or move assignment operator. With this
   option enabled, the following class won't be flagged:

   .. code-block:: c++

     struct A {
       A(const A&);
       A& operator=(const A&);
       ~A();
     };

.. option:: AllowMissingMoveFunctionsWhenCopyIsDeleted

   When set to `true` (default is `false`), this check doesn't flag classes
   which define deleted copy operations but don't define move operations. This
   flag is related to Google C++ Style Guide `Copyable and Movable Types
   <https://google.github.io/styleguide/cppguide.html#Copyable_Movable_Types>`_.
   With this option enabled, the following class won't be flagged:

   .. code-block:: c++

     struct A {
       A(const A&) = delete;
       A& operator=(const A&) = delete;
       ~A();
     };

.. option:: AllowImplicitlyDeletedCopyOrMove

   When set to `true` (default is `false`), this check doesn't flag classes
   which implicitly delete copy or move operations.
   With this option enabled, the following class won't be flagged:

   .. code-block:: c++

      struct A : boost::noncopyable {
        ~A() { std::cout << "dtor\n"; }
      };
